Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman posted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announced some show
number one Oh two courted
live Tuesday, February 12th, 2008. Support for
Hanselman it's just provided by
teller. It already controls the
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support is
also provided by.net developers journal.
The world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott discusses the entity framework
with Microsoft developer, Mike Pizo.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman
and this is another episode
of Hansel minutes, and I'm
fortunate enough to be sitting
here with Mike Pizo, a
principal architect in the data
program ability team here at
Microsoft, and we were in
building 35. Thanks for taking
time out of your busy
day to talk to me,
Mike. Well, thanks for coming.
So you work on the
team that produces the entity
framework. That's correct. And I
have personally felt a lot
of confusion about which data
strategy that I should do
my applications, you know, when
I sit down and I
go file new and I
get ready to make a
decision, I've got linked to
SQL, I've got ado.net classic
record sets. I've got these
kind of things that I
know, new things that are
coming out and I've got
the entity framework to choose
from. And I think that
some people may have felt
that linked to SQL and
entity framework were not really
complimentary and that they were
competing ends. But, but I
understand from talking to some
friends and building 35, but
that's not the case. Am
I, am I correct in
that? Right. Right. And there's
certainly a lot of similarities
between linked to sequel and
linked entities or the entity
framework in general. And those
similarities become very confusing before
we talk too much about
the similarities and differences between
the two. It's probably helpful
to define what linked to
SQLs and linked to entities
are. Yeah, I think that
would be helpful. And I
think it would also be
helpful to understand too, to
enable these technologies, what it
needs to be installed is
this just put a DLL
in a bin folder or
these downloads, how does this
get on my system as
well? Sure. So the short
answer to your second question,
how do these get installed?
Both linked to SQL and
linked to entities install as
part of the.net framework. So
I'm linking to SQL ships
today as part of visual
studio 2008. And it was
installed when you install visual
studio, the entity framework will
be part of an update
to the.net framework that will
ship in the middle of
this year. Okay. And so
in both cases, the bits
will be, there It be
a service pack or web
Dell or some format, but
it's part of the framework.
Correct. Okay. So it's baked
in. So at that point
I can choose either, either
one, correct. And these will
be system-wide services. There'll be
in the gap. So I
won't have to put anything
in my bin folder. This
is an add reference kind
of a thing that's right.
And these aren't involved other
than the compiler changes involved
with link. These don't involve
any changes to the C
sharp or VB component. No,
there's no specific code in
C sharp VB or any
of the languages or CLR
specifically for either linked to
sequel linked entities. Well, I
know with linked to SQL,
I can visual studio. My
experience is such that I
can go into a, the
server Explorer. I can drag
tables and relationships over into
a designer surface. And that
designer surface is a, there's
a pair of Rose colored
glasses on top of some
generated stuff. So if I
have a products table, I'll
get a products object. So
there's a often when people
are doing linked to SQL,
not always, but often there's
a very straight link between
the physical aspects of the
database and in the physical
aspects of my data, access
layer products to products. And
like that is, is that
the way it works in
India framework? The entity framework
is very similar as a
starting point. And actually walking
through that experience as a
good way to talk about
what similar and then how
the entity framework extends that
and goes beyond that. Okay.
So to back up and
define some of our terms,
the first term that we'll
be using a lot is
link, which stands for language
integrated query and is basically
the ability to build your
queries into the programming language.
So historically when you've programmed
against a database, we have
interoperable API APIs for passing
the connection information for passing
the query and retrieving results
from the database. But the
actual query itself was in
the form of an opaque
string opaque because the client
knew nothing about the contents
of that string, right? We
were tunneling language within a
string. Exactly. And it is
a language it's a full
syntax language. It's, it's almost
a full program, but the
compiler that you're using to
write your application has no
knowledge of the contents of
that string. So you don't
get statement completion. You don't
get IntelliSense, you don't get
any compile time type checking
for the strings that you're
passing. And what that means
is that you can basically
write your entire application. It
will compile, and it's not
until you execute it, that
you find syntax errors in
your string, that you find
you mistyped the name that
you, you did a type
or whatever. So no matter
how good of a SQL
programmer you are, there's always
going to be errors in
those strings. I make them
all the time and it's
difficult to debug those. So
what link provides is the
ability to use objects as
the metadata describing the metadata
you're using when you're querying
your database or well link
is not tied to relational.
Databases. Link is a general
feature, which allows you to
program a strongly typed schema
where the metadata for that
schema comes from objects themselves.
So there's a couple of
different technologies for link in
the framework. The first is
what we call linked to
objects, which is simply the
ability to build link queries
over any type collection. So
any of your eye enumerables
or eye collections, any list
in your program is now
queryable with visual studio, 2008.
We also have implementations of
link against XML, which allows
you to write strongly type
queries against XML. Right. I
love that stuff. And now
we're introducing linked to SQL
and linked to entities and
as well as linked to
dataset. Yeah. Oh, okay. So
there's three things to understand
that there's linked to SQL
from a data perspective, there's
linked to entities and then
there's linked to data. Correct.
Okay. So we'll, we'll try
to touch off a good
deal. Historically, the greater confusion
has been between linked to
sequencing to entities, but LinkedIn
data set certainly comes into
there. So we'll try to
cover that as well. Okay.
So link provides this programming
experience for building strongly typed
queries against any I credible
provider. So there's an interface
called I queryable, which is
similar in nature to innumerable
innumerable as an API that
a collection can implement. And
it gives a common way
for applications to iterate over
that collection. And in fact,
the language is built on
top of those language syntax,
such as the, for each
statement and both VB and
C sharp are basically just
sugar over calling that IEnumerable
and looping through those results.
And a very similar way
I queryable sets defines a
set of query operations. And
then in VB and C
sharp there's syntax sugar, that
allows you to have very
nice query syntax for building
queries that ended up calling
that an underlying I quibble
implementation. Okay. So when we
talk about different implementations of
link, what we're talking about
is different implementations of I
queryable. Ah, okay. So when
I think about things like
people have released a link
to Amazon web services or
linked to flicker, they're converting
those, I queryable Lambdas and
turning them into something that
is appropriate to that underlying
data source. Correct. CRA, okay.
So that makes sense. So
getting back to the link
to sequel, what is linked
to SQL linked to SQL
is an implementation of that.
I quibble interface over a
SQL server schema and the
design experience becomes very nice.
As you say, if you're
trying to query against the
SQL server schema, you can
start up visual studio, select
a link to SQL project,
and you get a nice
design experience where you can
drag on tables and dragging
on tables allows you to
generate classes for those specific
tables, right? So they're pretty
much one-to-one. You can change
the naming. So if you've
got some obscure column name,
you can provide a more
friendly name. You can, if
you have the one things
that relational databases don't do
well is describe inheritance hierarchies.
And so that's often modeled
in a relational database by
having a single table, which
has discriminator columns, where the
discriminator specifies this particular row
represents this subtype or this
other subtype. So linked to
SQL does let you map
an inheritance hierarchy to that
single table with a discriminary
column. The other thing it
does is it allows you
to map relationships to foreign
key columns, but for the
most part, it's a pretty
direct one-to-one mapping. What you
drag onto the design surface
is pretty much the set
of entities that you have
to program again. Okay. So
does that mean that it
provides a layer of abstraction,
but not necessarily a strong
layer of indirection? Yes. Yes.
Okay. So you really are
generating queries directly against the
underlying schema when you're using
linked to SQL, but it
gives you a very nice
experience that not only allows
you to query in terms
of strongly typed objects, but
also those objects are returned
as CLR objects that you
can then make changes to
those changes or are change
tracked. And then later you
can call save changes and
it'll generate the right DML
statements or call store procedures,
depending on how you've configured
DML being the markup language
that is describing the database
underlying DML, being the data
manipulation language, which is the
inserts updates and delete statements
that you use in order
to modify relational. Oh, so
there's DBML yes. Which is
describing that diagram. It's the
XML file that looks at
diagram look like that. Right.
And then there's DML, right.
Which is what you just
discussed. Yes. We have far
too many, three letter and
four letter acronyms. Well, you
know, this is one of
the things, I mean, visual
studio is, is a pair
of Rose colored glasses, and
there's nothing wrong with wearing
those glasses. I kinda like
looking at the world that
way, but every once in
a while, you want to
just open that guy up
and solution Explorer and see
what's happening. Just so you
know that no, one's trying
to fool you. It's the
same as the power of,
of HTTP. I mean, HDTV
is great. You generally don't
need to look at the
HTML and understand everything, but
it's nice to have there.
And it's nice to look
at it now and then
Exactly. And that's the kind
of stuff that I want
to understand. So when we
start talking about LinkedIn entities,
there's magic happening and I
choose to, to, you know,
live in that matrix, but
I wanna be able to
peek underneath and see what's
happening. So, So that's sort
of the link to SQL
experience and it can best
be summarized as a strongly
typed experience over a SQL
server schema. So it gives
you the ability to query
in terms of link, bring
back objects, modify those objects
and save changes to those
objects. And as you said
before, this is using the
Meda data in the SQL
server that was already there.
And we're just kind of
bringing it up into a
more consumable format. This is
the kind of stuff that
a lot of progressive people
in the early two thousands
were doing with cogeneration. Yep.
Taking a look at a
database saying, Hey, that looks
like information. I already have.
Let's flow that up towards,
into a CLR object. And
specifically the design experience within
visual studio does generate classes.
And as I alluded to
before those classes provide the
metadata that link uses in
order to do the strong
type checking of your query
as you build it. Cool.
So the link to entities
experience is very similar to
start with, and that's one
of the reasons for the
confusion. Okay. Once you install
the entity framework, we also
have a design surface and
you'll be able to select
from the add new item
templates, a ado.net data model.
And when you select that,
you'll have a wizard that
allows you to select the
tables and the views and
the store procedures that you
want to bring into your
project. And again, you'll have
a design surface that design
surface by default will generate
entities, which are one-to-one with
the tables, views are stored
procedures that you've selected, but
that's sort of where the
similarities. And unfortunately, this is
where I think a lot
of people stop themselves. They
go, ah, what the, what
is this? Right? So The
next step that you can
do is you can view
the mapping details and the
entity framework. And here's where
you really have a lot
of control over how you
map your entities or your
objects as they're instantiated within
the.net framework, using LinkedIn entities,
how you can modify how
those mapped to your underlying
relational schema. Okay. So to
back up a step linked
to entities is link over
the entity framework. And the
entity framework is all about
something we call the entity
data model and the entity
data model is a conceptual
model that allows you to
think in terms of entities
and relationships, that more closely
reflect the real rule concepts
that you typically deal with
in an application. So a
relational database has tables and
it has constraints. And that's
really about all it doesn't
have the concept of a
relationship. It has foreign keys,
which are constraints, and they're
a little bit different. They're
not exposed to the query
language. So there's no easy
way to navigate a foreign
key. You have to create
a join. It doesn't have
higher level modeling concepts such
as inheritance. It doesn't have
some of the other things
that you would typically have
in a higher level programming
model. So the entity data
model is an entity relationship
model that allows you to
define entities that are, that
is types that have a
specific identity. Those types can
have inheritance. They can be
mapped, or you can have
relationships between your types. And
those are strongly defined relationships
that is, we understand characteristics
of the relationships such as
cardinality. They're not just CLR
references that have no meaning
in the model. And then
you can have other higher
level concepts like complex types.
That is a member that
has like address field, which
may have multiple members itself.
First name, last name, city,
state, and zip, for example,
these are also called composite
types sometimes. Okay. And then
you also have things like
many to many relationships. So
the first part of the
entity data model is defining
this conceptual model. And that's
what you can do in
the design surface. In fact,
with the entity framework, ado.net
data model designer, you can
either choose to start with
a database and generate a
default model from that database.
Or you can start with
a clean slate and just
design your entities from scratch
to have the entities and
the relationships that you're interested
in. Okay. So this is
using, using that design surface
as your kind of ER,
studio. Exactly, exactly. And this,
this the way I'm kind
of put this in my
own head, I'm trying to
model this in my own
brain. Is that the, that
there's the physical aspects of
your database, which can be
modeled via linked to SQL,
and there can be some
mappings, but for the most
part what's going on in
your database is what's going
on in the object when
the link to SQL world.
But that extra layer of
indirection is, is basically saying
that there's the physical characteristics
of your database, which are
not always the logical representation
of your, of your data
model. You may have this
logical concept in your entities
of products, but products may
be inside of three different
tables and they may look
entirely different, right? So then
you're shielding them from all
those. So, so the entity
framework is an implementation of
the entity model over a
relational store, over an ado.net
data provider. Okay. So what
we've done with entity framework
is we've expanded the definition
of an ado.net data provider,
so that other data providers
besides SQL client can plug
into this framework and the
way that we've extended, it
is basically by providing a
mechanism whereby we can pass
a query in economical form
as a syntax tree and
expression tree, and the provider
generates their provider specific sequel
out of that syntax tree.
Ah, okay. So that's how
other providers can plug into
the entity framework. One layer
above that we have something
called the end of the
client and the end of
the client is an ado.net
data provider. So it has
a connection, a command and
a data reader. You can
actually program against it directly
without generating objects and without
using link. Okay. Okay. So
in this instance, ado.net is
not talking to the SQL
data provider, but talking to
the entity client data provider,
which is providing that layer
of, And the entity client
data providers in turn talking
to either the SQL client,
the SQL server data provider,
the Oracle client, the DB
two, or whatever other provider.
I have an understanding of
this I'm up in a,
in a, in a client
application. And I, I'm doing
linked to entities. I've described
my, my logical data model.
And then I, I send
something off via LinkedIn entities
that get translated into an
I query will interface, which
has an interpreted by the
entity client. The entity client
then talks to it's a
ado.net provider, which then takes
that abstract syntax tree. And
it passes it along to
either the SQL provider or
the Oracle provider translates that
into either T sequel or
Oracle SQL and then along
and then back. Right. And
then the record set Of
course follows all the way
back. Right. And, and so
that's all a part of
the magic that goes on
under the covers. Now you,
as the programmer within visual
studio, don't need to think
about or see any of
that. That's all sort of
wired for you as part
of this entity framework experience,
right? So within the designer,
now you can specify more
complex mappings between the entities
that you have in your
entity model and the actual
storage and the database. So
for instance, you can map
multiple tables to the same
entity, or you can map
multiple entity types to the
same table, or you can
map many to many relationships
that take out the joint
table. So you just said,
I could do multiple entity
types to one table. So
I could have a table
of, I don't know, products,
but I really wanted to
have, let's say I had
different entities, products and discounted
products. And based on some
flipped bit in a column
somewhere, I wanted my entity
monitor look entirely different where
someone could get back a
list of products or a
list of just discounted products,
even though they're being stored
in a single table. Correct.
I can see where that'd
be more to do that
in another, the old fashioned
In, in this example of
products and discontinued products, it's
likely that they're an either
be the same entity type,
but different logical entity extents
for those that is the
type may look the same,
but there are different entity
sets and the entity framework
does support that. So that's
a great example for a
different mapping concept. A similar
concept is it would be
inheritance where maybe a discontinued
product has the data, it
was discontinued. So that's not
a completely different type, but
it's derived from that type.
And again, you may have,
you may have a different
extent for it, or it
may just be when you
query the products extent you
asked specifically for discontinued products
or you specifically filter out
discontinued products. So in fact,
with both link and with
a variant of SQL, we
call entity sequel. You can
use the type information as
part of your query, because
again, the type information is
part of the entity model.
It's part of the model
that you're working with at
the application layer. So in
addition to being able to
perhaps a better example of
mapping multiple types to the
same table, the extreme example
of mapping multiple types to
the same table is a
scenario we call the universal
database scenario. And so a
highly normalized database is one
in which there are multiple
tables and there's no redundancy
of information. There's a high
number of you find a
high number of tables with
a lot of foreign keys
relating all these different tables.
Those are usually pretty hard
to read. They're very hard
to read. And again, they're
not the, they're not the
model the application wants. And
so the entity framework allows
you to have flexible mapping
where you take what's in
multiple different tables and where
they logically represent one type
or an inheritance of type
that's the model that the
application works with through the
end of the model. So
that's, that's the first half
of that. The other extreme
to that highly normalized schema
is a single table where
all of your types are
stored. And in this case,
it's a single table. There's
again, usually a discriminator column
that says this type is
a customer. This type is
an order of this type
is an order detail. In
this case, there's no necessarily
any commonality between these different
types during the single table.
So you've got columns, a
very sparse table where some
columns are used for one
type, some columns are used
for another type. Again, that's
not a very convenient model
to pro gram against from
using your application, but the
entity model and the entity
framework can actually model the
same model, the same customer
order, order detail, either highly
factored into these normalized tables.
As you typically see in
a specialized enterprise database, or
the same model can be
mapped to a single table
where it actually uses a
discriminator to specify the different
types. So that's, that's just
an example of some of
the flexibility of the mapping
defined by part of the
entity frame. Yeah. I mean,
I've got like a tear
coming down my eye here,
cause I'm thinking of a
particular database that I've worked
on, where it was going
to, you know, the, the,
the grant database plan, right.
It was the end database
to end all databases. And,
you know, you started out
with the person and then
suddenly address and then, well,
there's multiple addresses and billing
address and mailing address. And
then we start to blow
the address apart. And that
became different postal codes and
it got more and more
and more complicated so that
the concept of a person
was like, you know, literally
spread across like nine, 10
different tables, and then you
start relating them to accounts
and the programmer, you know,
the, the, the poor guy
who's got to just get
that data grid filled up
on the client side. It's
like, just give me a
person. Right. Where's get person.
Can I just have a
person object please? Well, no,
you have to go and
retrieve this. And then you
start getting into issues like
lazy loading, which would be
something I'd be interested, understanding,
like a person might have
an, an address, but perhaps
that's in another database somewhere.
Do I get a person
object back? And he has
an address object and I
don't go and data access
that data until I access
that property. What about those
kinds of, can you have
sparse objects? Yeah. So these
are all great questions. Yes.
All right. I'm going to
rapid fire. I'm like, how
can I use this tomorrow?
So backing up a little
bit, please just elaborate on
your example. Not only does
it become difficult for the
programmer to write the code
that figures out how to
get the information for their
logical person out of 12
different tables. But that code
is very, very brittle and
very, very hard to read
and maintain because it has
a lot of implicit knowledge
baked into the string query.
So it's not even something
that we can reflect on
and understand where we factor
or refactor. That depends on
the physical layout of the
database. So later, if you
change some field in the
database, it's going to totally
disrupt the queries that you
have in ways that are
difficult to track down and
understand. So part of the
beauty of the entity framework
is not just that it
provides these mapping capabilities, but
those mapping capabilities are specified
declaratively through a mapping file.
And if you decide to
change the underlying store, if
you refactor things or renormalize,
or de normalize your tables,
you can modify that mapping.
And in fact, you don't
have to regenerate, rewrite, or
even recompile your application. It
continues working because it's working
in terms of this conceptual
model and the classes that
were either generated or handwritten
to reflect that conceptual model.
And those are being declaratively
mapped through this mapping file
to your particular storage schema.
Now, this doesn't seem like
too thick of a layer.
It sounds like there's a
lot going on, but it's,
it doesn't appear to me,
you know, in thinking about
the stack and trying to
visualize it, that there's a
huge distance between myself and
the database That, that, that
is in fact, the case,
and really to understand how
this works. The typical approach
to doing ORMs is to
sort of do query rewrites,
where you get a query
in and you apply a
set of transformations to that
query, right? Because I'm familiar
with a number of open
source RMS that I was
going to ask you about
how you relate to those
guys. Right? So, so typically
in those scenarios, there, there's
a fairly straightforward set of
transformations. And if you decide
to add a new mapping
concept, you go and you
implement a new transformation and
it sort of goes through.
And when you start off
and there's only three or
four transformations where you're changing
names or doing inheritance or
something like that, it's pretty
straight forward. Right. But as
you add more and more
transformations, like being able to
take a one entity and
map it to multiple different
tables, the interaction between those
transformations starts becoming very complex
and very difficult to manage.
And it's even harder when
you try now to send
updates through the same pipeline.
Cause you have to sort
of write the reverse transformation.
That was my next question.
It's fine. The updates issue
is always a problem where
it's, Oh, look how easy
it is to get the
data. And then you've got
to figure out how to
put it back in the
right order. Right? And so
what the entity, the entity
framework really takes sort of
a novel approach to how
it does this mapping. And
it does it through something
we call client views and
client views are basically similar
to relational views. And that
we define a view to
represent your entity set and
a query in terms of
this entity SQL this canonical
syntax that I had mentioned
before, that transforms that conceptual
query the query against the
conceptual view, into the query
against your actual storage tables.
Now it's important to understand
that those views are generated
at design time. And then
when you pose a query
to the system, we go
through a, an expansion phase
where we replace references to
the entity sets the conceptual
entity sets with these generated
queries that are in terms
of the actual storage schema.
Okay, now we don't do
any query evaluation on the
client. We just do the
simple expansion step on the
client. And then we pass
the query down to the
backend. The backend then is
able to take that query,
which is now in terms
of the storage schema and
do what it's good at,
which is executing that query
and returning us to the
results. Doesn't put too much
pressure on the client as
far as performance or So,
as far as performance is
concerned, there's sort of three
areas to think about, okay,
the first is loading the
metadata associated with the model
and the transformations to the
actual storage schema. And so
there's a fair amount of
metadata that needs to get
loaded, right? But that only
has to happen once. And
we've made a significant investment
in cashing that metadata and
even compiling, we've done some
work with trying to compile
the metadata and those transformations,
so that to minimize that
hit, okay, the second hit
is actually the query transformation.
So you're getting a query
that is represented in this
canonical manner. And eventually that
ends up generating SQL and
it's a fairly straight forward
path, but there's certain steps
involved and that can be
expensive. So the investment there
is again to do compilation
of those so we can
compile the query. So that
at runtime you're, you're not,
well, I'm sorry. Step back.
When we talk about compiled
queries, it's not designed time
compilation, but basically you kind
of chit it exactly the
first time you use it,
we can compile it and
then you can reference a
compiled query for repeated execution.
So you're not at yourself
or is that handled for
you? How much of what
I guess I'm trying to
understand is how much awareness
does a client of this
have to have. So, so
at the link level, if
you want to use compiled
queries, there's a mechanism for
you to create the compiled
query and then call that
compiled query as if it
were a method that may
be parameterized. Okay. If so,
so you don't have to
think about, Oh, I've got
these different layers and how
do they interact? And it's
fairly straightforward, but yeah, you
do define, this is a
query that I'm going to
call multiple times. Okay. So
I want you to go
through the work of compiling
it and giving me a
very fast access pet. This
is not uncommon for like
things like XSLT or red
jacks. I mean, there are
those things that cost on
the client that we know
that there's a client library.
You can use it as
per usual, or you can
hang onto one and then
use that compiled one. Right.
Okay. Right. So compile queries,
give us the ability to
sort of factor away that
for repeated execution. Okay. And
the final stage is the
materialization of the objects. So
if you're using linked to
SQL or linked to entities,
we at some point are
getting records out of the
database and we need to
transform those into CLR objects.
Again, we do a lot
of work in order to,
we do something called lightweight
code gen, which is we
generate the actual property setters
and object constructors to make
it as quick and efficient
as possible to retrieve those
objects and generate them. But
there is some overhead because
you're representing your results now
in terms of an object,
as opposed to a standard
ad hoc record. So we've
done everything that we can
to try to optimize that
scenario as well. So the
end result is, as you
say, even though a lot
is going on under the
covers, it's all pretty straight
forward. And at runtime, we've
got a very efficient path
through the stack. Now this
is true. The compiled queries
and the result materialization are
true, both for the link
to SQL and the link
to entity stack. It's arguably
more important than the link
to entity stack, where we're
doing more sophisticated transformations, but
I wanted to be clear
that that was a feature
of both sides. Now, how
much pressure is there on
the part of the person
who is writing one of
these providers for a particular
database to affect performance? I
mean, if I'm going to
go and write the, my
SQL entity framework provider, it
appeared from what you were
describing that most of this
stuff is happening outside of
that person's control. So there's
not a whole lot that
they can do in the,
in the creation of their,
their SQL from the app
sec abstract syntax tree to
kind of screw it up.
Right. So, so that's true.
And in fact, we have
been working with a number
of providers. We've had a
couple of different what we
call provider fests, where we've
had provider riders come in
house, and we've worked with
them specifically on understanding how
to take that syntax tree
and generate the SQL. And
in fact, it's been a
fairly straightforward process. We've had
great success with that. There's
not a lot that the
provider can do in that
path that would affect performance
other than to think about
the types of SQL that
they generate. So there may
be optimizations where in the
common syntax, there is a
particular operator and there may
be different ways that they
could translate that operator into
a SQL when they generate
the sequel. Do they want
to do the one that's
the most efficient for their
particular platform? Correct? Correct. And
in fact, for SQL client,
we have a flag internally
that tells us whether we're
generating SQL for SQL server
2005 or 2000 or 2008.
And we made, generate slightly
different sequel for the different
ends to optimize for that
particular backend. But that's a
fairly minor optimization in terms
of the overall path. The
other thing we found is
that the queer processors do
a pretty good job of
optimizing the queries once they
get in the database. So
I was doing some experimentation
where I was trying to
figure out ways to provide
hints or rewrite queries in
order to generate better patterns
that were then passed down
to the store. And although
I could affect the length
of the queries that were
generated, make them more aesthetically
pretty, right, exactly. Typically the
overall performance of the queries
didn't vary much because the
plan compilers in the database
were so good at recognizing
the patterns, caching that pattern
and then re executing it
multiple times. I remember I
used to spend hours and
hours trying to get my
certain sense of aesthetic my
own brand of aesthetic inside
of the SQL. And it
sounds like that as I'm
spending these hours, trying to
make it prettier, of course,
hours are being spent on
the SQL processes to just
make it faster, no matter
what it looks like. So,
Right. In some ways it
was relieving to see that
the framework and the, and
the database were doing such
a good job. In some
ways it was humbling because
I wanted to have more
control over it. And I
found that even my best
efforts were normally not worth
the effort Loss of the
there's, the loss of the,
that aesthetic. I mean, there
are CQL as feats out
there and I've respect them.
And from performance perspective, I
assume all the other, I
mean, all the regular things
and making a database better
as far as good use
of indexes and clustered in
texts, and you can still
run the profile and look
at the query plan. And
what if the query plan
doesn't look right? And you
feel that it's, it's doing
something inappropriate and you don't
like how that SQL went
down because the query plan
isn't efficient. So in cases
where the career plan is
efficient, oftentimes it has to
do with those things that
you're just mentioning. Do I
have a good index? Do
I have a good physical
layout of the database? Is
it lending itself well to
those queries, if that's not
the case, if things are,
are well set out and
it's just the queries that
are being generated, then yeah.
You can play around a
little bit with the way
that you build a query
to try to optimize it
much as you would, if
you were just passing a
string down. But in most
cases that we've looked at,
it's more a case of
how the database is set
up than how the queries
themselves are being. That's just,
as we, as we wrap
up here at the very
beginning, we also talked about
a link to dataset and
you were going to touch
a little bit on that.
Yeah. So linked to data
set is basically taking the
existing ado.net data set, which
is an in memory, relational
cache and link enabling it.
So since we came out
with the ado.net data set
in version one, I thought
it was something much more
mysterious Trickier in our naming.
Since ADA had done that
1.0, people have loved the
data set as a means
of moving data with changes
back and forth across the
web, as a way of
aggregating data from multiple sources
as a way to bind
and interact with data and
memory in a very rich
way. And one of the
biggest requests we've had since
ado.net 1.0 is better query
ability over the data once
it's in the data set.
And so by link enabling
the data set, we're not
only giving you link, but
we're also giving you query.
So the first time you're
able to really write within
the data set queries that
join different tables within the
data set. And in fact,
you can join the tables
within the dataset with collections
that you have outside of
the data set, you can
invoke CLR methods as part
of your query. It's a
very, very well integrated query
experience for really using the
data that you have in
the dataset. So the use
cases don't really change the
scenarios that you use data
set in the old days
are still scenarios that you'd
use data set today. We've
just now enhanced that experience
by adding link to it,
the scenarios where you used
to use data readers and
would in all likelihood end
up generating your own objects
and populating those objects and
so forth is now done
for you with linked to
sequel, when your objects directly
represent the scheme of your
database, and you're going against
SQL server or with entity
framework, when you want to
work with a, a richer
model that has more flexibility
in how it maps to
the relational store. Okay. That's,
I'm sorry. That makes a
lot more sense. When you
brought into the, when you
start talking with the data
reader and I've written just
thousands of lines of that
code, where I'm spinning through
the data reader and going
basically shuffling the deck. I
like to say, you know,
this one goes here and
that one goes there and
column zero goes there. Now
full disclosure though. I know
that there's, some listeners are
gonna chuckle because I wrote
an essay a number of
years ago called returning data
sets from web services or
the spawn of Satan and
the recall evil. So when
you said data sets, I've
used data sets a number
of times for WinForms applications
for binding and stuff like
that. But I always get
worried when data sets get
passed around inside of web
services as a result, which
one of these three technologies
would, I want to use
if I wanted really nice
XML to be passed into
a web service. So I
wanted to take that object.
And then she realized that
that tree and that, that
object graph, would it be,
could I take those links
to SQL a, between those
linked to entities objects, Mark
them up with a, you
know, XML sterilizable and then
pass them along their way
as angle bracket. So the
generated objects, both in linked
to SQL and linked to
entities are serialized. That said,
what serializes is the current
values of those, not the
original values. So today with
both linked to SQL, linked
to entities, there's additional work
that you would need to
do in order to transport
the original values. That is
the chain set that you
get with the diff ground,
the dataset diff gram today.
Okay. Now it's just the
thing You get. If you
do in fact pass datasets,
because you're getting that extra
bit of, of context that
makes Now, if you are
trying to write a data
service, that is what you're
trying to expose is a
rich way to interact with
your data. Then the technology
to look at which I
know you've had a previous
podcast on, yeah. Is what
we used to call a
project a Storia and is
now called ado.net data services
and ado.net data services basically
build on this entity data
model and allow you to
not publish just methods for
calling in and getting back
a fixed set of results,
but actually to publish your
entity model and allow the
application to query that end
D model through a rest
based a very natural URL
based mechanism that identifies the
particular resources within that entity
model that you want to
query. So now it's all
coming full circle for me
now. So then if I'm
doing entity framework work and
I want to start exposing
it, then it is a
story. And the, that, that,
that those data ado.net data
services, I guess I like
calling them by their code
names. So it's easier that
I would want to expose.
So that makes sense then.
Yeah. So, so the ado.net
data services technically are able
to query over any I
queryable interface. So any link
enabled provider you can query
over now, if you want
to do updating against the
data source, you have to
implement an additional interface called
I updatable. And then there
was other functionality that we're
looking at adding over time,
which will require other incremental
investments. Now, the nice thing
about the entity framework is
it will, we will have
an implementation of all of
these interfaces directly over the
energy framework and a very
nice design experience where you
can walk into visual studio,
you can create your entity
model, and then you can
go in and create your
ado.net data service, point it
to that entity model and
specify. These are the entity
sets that I want to
expose, and you're off and
running. You have a data
service that can be called
from any HTTP client. You
can then go beyond that
and start on adding additional
service operations, additional intersection. A
lot of other features that
ado.net data services have built
in, but it's, it's a
great experience. And part of
the, part of the promise
of the entity data model
is building on this common
model, not just the ability
to have link expressions that
are mapped to a database,
but to build a whole
framework around services around other
components that work in terms
of this conceptual model. So
this is good. I'm just
trying to, sorry. I'm actually
kind of pause. It's giving
me pause and whenever I
have conversations like this, I
start kind of mentally drawing
the stack and I'm gonna
have to go draw a
picture about this and blog
about it because suddenly what
I thought was a lot
more complicated stack, got a
lot more, a lot simpler.
Great. You know, sometimes it
just seems so wide. I
mean, I'm wondering around Microsoft
and someone's always working on
something and I always worry
that these things don't inter-operate
and they don't work together.
And it freaks me out
a little bit and the
way that I go and
try to get a better
understanding as I talk to
people like you. And then
I go home and I
draw a picture. Yeah, well,
I was very nervous about
doing this webcast because as
an architect and an Italian,
I speak with my hands,
or I draw on the
white. That is true. You
are, and try and understand
how to communicate some of
these concepts without being able
to draw on my whiteboard
was a little bit intimidating.
Okay. I will, I will
add a proper slide with
explanation of what this looks
like. I really appreciate you
taking the time to sit
down with me today. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.